So all of the mechanisms suggest that estrogen imbalance relative to progesterone is what is
causing the hot flashes. The fact that you can stop a hot flash with estrogen is probably because
estrogen activates cortisol and other stress hormones that block the metabolism of estrogen,
and that has the potential to inhibit nitric oxide synthesis.
Okay, so but nitric oxide will increase estrogen though, don't they kind of all work together? So
it's just the overabundance can inhibit it. Can you kind of go over that one more time?
It tends to be a vicious circle, but estrogen is one of the, estrogen and stress and hypoglycemia
will all activate nitric oxide and progesterone inhibits it partly by keeping steady sugar
metabolism, maintaining body temperature. A lower body temperature creates a vicious circle,
including the production of more estrogen.
Welcome to the Weight Loss for Women podcast, a place where we share everything you need to
know about restoring your metabolism so you can eat more, train less, and lose weight in a healthy
and sustainable way. I'm Kitty Blomfield, co-founder of NuStrength and Saturée,
creator of Prometabolic Food Supplements and seriously saturatée skincare. And today I'm
really excited to have Dr. Ray Peat and Kate Deering back on the podcast. So we've done
quite a few podcasts with both of them. So I highly recommend you go back and listen to those.
But today we wanted to get Ray back on to talk more about estrogen replacement therapy.
And we also dive into some of the myths around milk and calcium. So if you're anything like I
once was, you know, you probably thought milk and dairy products caused inflammation and cancer. And
you know, I thought they were too high in sugar. So I cut them all out of my diet. And I was
actually diagnosed with lactose intolerance at age 12. So my mum put me on bloody soy milk
and all those disgusting cheeses, you know, non-dairy cheeses. But when I met
Emma, I realized that I couldn't digest dairy because I had a stress digestive system. So,
you know, once I improved that and improved all my metabolic markers, I was able to tolerate
dairy again. And you know, calcium has so many benefits and is needed by the body for so many
different things which we cover in this podcast. So it is jam packed with information. So I highly
recommend you grab a pen and paper and take notes. And as always, please rate and review the podcast.
So if you add the podcast episodes, if you've rated and reviewed us before, you can do it as
many times as you like. And each month, I actually pick a winner from those that share. So if you'd
like to win a tub of Saturatée Premium Collagen, all you need to do is take a screenshot of the
review or the podcast episode and share it on Instagram stories and tag me at K-I-T-T-Y-B-L-O-M-F-I-E-L-D.
And like I said, each month, I just pick a winner, pick someone from those that have shared and they
get a tub of Saturatée Premium Collagen. So look, I hope you learn as much as I did in this episode.
Let's get into it. Super, super excited to welcome back to the podcast, Dr. Ray Peat and Kate Deering.
Hi, guys. Welcome back. Hello, Miss Kitty. How are you today? All good?
Yeah, all good here. Yep. Sure, too. Okay, great. So this is, I think, probably maybe the fifth time
we've had Dr. Peat on the podcast. We've had Kate Deering on the podcast probably 10 plus times.
And the last podcast we had, there was quite a lot of questions around
issues and replacement therapy. So we thought we'd start this podcast.
Kate just wanted to ask Dr. Peat some questions around that. And then we wanted to dive into
myths around calcium and milk. So Kate, I'll hand over to you.
Okay. So yeah, a lot of what we talked about last time was certainly estrogen and the industry of
estrogen, which went down a lot of trails of estrogen replacement therapy. Because obviously
when women enter menopause, it seems to be somewhere that they're driven to because
it can make them feel better. And so during the course of this, I was actually referred to a book
if people want to look it up called Estrogen Matters by Dr. Avram Blumming and Carol Tavris.
And so I thought we would talk about some of the things that he says in there, because he's
certainly a pro estrogen therapy doctor. So in this book, he definitely talks about that
estrogen therapy has some good reasons to take it, especially for women. There's good and bad,
but one of his things he says that estrogen therapy can help with heart disease. And so I thought Dr.
Peat could maybe elaborate on some of these claims that the estrogen industry is saying about what
it's doing to help benefit women. I have been writing newsletters on that topic in particular,
many years ago, showing the contrary research that women do have a better outcome for heart
health at the end of their lives. But progesterone is the heart protected factor. For decades,
I've been saying that the research shows that estrogen increases clotting, many kinds of
inflammation, and other factors relating to plaque formation, arterial spasms, and so on.
The progesterone has many life extending properties, especially against heart disease,
but against all of the degenerative tissue processes. Demonstrated first rabbit studies
showed very clearly that the higher their progesterone exposure relative to estrogen,
the longer they lived, and the younger all of their tissues were at a given age. And then that
was supported by population studies in humans over the course of their life. For example,
having more babies leaves their body more able to produce progesterone and regulate downward estrogen.
So the facts are historically very clear against estrogen's protective effects, though you have
to start out with the fact that beginning in 1942, after several years of research showing that
estrogen caused infertility, was in a board of patient, and had many dangerous properties,
including blood clotting. This was established starting in the mid 1930s, and the carcinogenic
effects were clearly shown in animal studies all through that period, culminating in a 1950 book
by Alexander Lipschutz, for example, showing that estrogen was carcinogenic
to every tissue in the body, not just breast, uterus, brain, and so on, but lungs, kidneys,
all the other organs, if it isn't interrupted regularly by progesterone. One of the main
functions of progesterone is to knock out estrogen protects against stresses such as estrogen.
So in 1942, the drug industry managed to convince the FDA that it was
all right to use estrogen to treat menopause, including infertility symptoms,
exactly opposite of what the facts were showing for several years.
Using their financial power, they convinced the FDA to approve it for all of these
illogical uses, and they used that market power to finance research to practically force the
deans of medical schools to oversee the research done in their schools to make sure their
medical school would keep getting generous financing for research purposes. And the same
thing with journals. They let it be known that they were buying advertising that would enrich
the journals, and if there weren't advertisements in the journals, the journals would sell them
reprints of their articles, sometimes for huge amounts of money, which were essentially
bribes to the journals to publish things regardless of their truth. And that same power
went directly to influencing doctors, giving them kickbacks for prescribing estrogen,
and finally to direct advertising to the public. So starting right in 1942, the estrogen industry
profoundly corrupted science changed the whole nature of how the public thinks about it.
And as people grew up in a culture in which estrogen was said to cure hundreds of different
conditions, contrary to the facts, the people growing up in that generalized culture of estrogen
worship, when they got to medical school, that was still their framework. And so when they found that
doing research that would support the estrogen industry, that was all that was going to be
financed. The background belief that was observed from the culture, just the so-called common
knowledge, that was reinforced by the knowledge that their career could thrive if they came up
with results that favored the estrogen industry. And the result was that hundreds of diseases
promoted by estrogen were, according to articles in medical journals, claimed to cure or prevent
exactly that same disease it caused. For example, it was widely known that estrogen caused abortions,
but they found professors at Harvard who would say that it's a female hormone,
and people who are infertile must be less female. And so if you give them estrogen,
it'll make them more feminine and therefore more fertile. So using diethylstilbestrol,
they prescribed estrogen ultimately to millions of women,
damaging their babies and their own health, causing generations of
uterine cancer, various deformities, and so on. So the most outrageous falsehood about what
estrogen does took years and years to be reversed. And in the first studies of estrogen in humans,
they saw no benefit at all to the bones and skeleton. If anything, the estrogen was causing
soft tissues to bind calcium, not to bones. And so they did animal studies.
The first research animal they used was the beagle dog, and it happened that estrogen
very distinctly damaged and weakened their bones. And apparently people understanding that nocturnal
rodents react almost oppositely to steroid hormones to human beings. They settled on
rats as their proof that estrogen would prevent or cure osteoporosis. Again, the history of it is
based on obvious fraud. And the same with heart disease, for example, they were so convinced,
they convinced the regulators that estrogen was why women didn't have so much heart disease,
that they started giving estrogen to men. And it didn't take long before the men were having
more heart problems, heart attacks in particular. Yeah, I think that is an assumption with a little
just kind of kind of go over a little bit about heart disease in women. And I think it's believed
since women have estrogen, because they do have less heart disease pre menopausal. And I've always
heard it's usually because women have a cycle and they have a way of dumping out iron. And would you
say that might be the reason why women have less heart disease? It's just because they can get rid
of toxic metals like iron. Definitely. When they stop menstruating, their iron level
goes up sharply. But progesterone does many other things besides allow menstruation.
The first missed menstruation, the beginning of menopause, when you measure the hormones,
estrogen hasn't changed at all and won't for a few months. But estrogen is what fails
when menstruation stops. Again, another evidence that progesterone is a protective factor.
And in the absence of progesterone beginning with menopause, you have unopposed estrogen
for the first few months. Around the age of 38 is generally the peak of estrogen production.
And then shortly after that, you get progressive failure of progesterone production. So the
unopposed estrogen is astronomically high in that period from age 38 up until menopause whenever
that is. Right. And when you would say unopposed, because it seems that a lot of women during that
age will get their hormones checked, and they'll come back and say, well, my estradiol is low. So
they're being told to get on estrogen therapy even before menopause. Estradiol is an oil-loving
substance. And the way that it's eliminated is to add either sulfuric acid or glucuronic acid
to the estrogen molecule. That makes it water soluble. And so it's circulating in the blood
when it's being eliminated from the body. Progesterone in at least half a dozen ways
activates and inactivates the enzymes regulating the attachment of the acid or the removal of the
acid. So in the absence of progesterone, the soluble form of estrogen circulating in the blood
is decreased, but that means the oil-soluble form stays within cells. And within cells,
it activates various things, including aromatase. So in the absence of progesterone,
you're increasing aromatase, and you're blocking the enzymes that excrete it. So as it falls,
the level falls in the blood, the actual intracellular form is increasing.
Okay, so kind of to summarize that, when you release progesterone, certainly during your cycle,
that's also going to increase the estrogen in the blood because it's there to be excreted.
So no progesterone, there's always going to be less estrogen in the blood because the progesterone
is needed to activate the estrogen to release, is that correct? And something I've also heard too
about women that have been on estrogen therapy, and I think this is another theory, is when they're
on and they get off estrogen therapy, that they're told, well, your cholesterol levels have elevated.
And so they're like, well, and then they're being told, well, because estrogen is protective for
your heart. Can estrogen have an effect on the liver that would affect cholesterol numbers?
Because obviously, just because your cholesterol is up or down, does it mean
technically that you have any more chances of heart disease?
Yeah, the reason women have about 10 times higher incidence of thyroid deficiency and rheumatoid
autoimmune diseases is because estrogen knocks out the detoxifying process in the liver that
removes estrogen. So the more estrogen circulating and produce, the more your liver suffers,
your thyroid is suppressed, and the liver slows down all of its metabolism, especially the
glucuronidase and sulfotransferase enzymes that would detoxify estrogen. So the defensive processes
produce more progesterone, but if your thyroid is less active because of the estrogen blockage,
then you're needing something to increase the protective progesterone. And it happens that if
you can increase cholesterol in circulation, it directly supports the production of steroids
in the brain as well as in the ovaries and adrenals. So rising cholesterol compensates
for excess estrogen and the resulting hypothyroidism. If you isolate an ovary,
measure how much progesterone is coming out of the ovary, and then you increase the cholesterol
circulating in the blood, you directly increase the production of progesterone.
So there's a way to misinterpret everything. Well, that's what I'm always finding. So you're
saying that if you get on estrogen, because what, like I said, people say when they get
off estrogen therapy, my cholesterol levels elevated, and you're saying that is happening
because maybe of the damage to the liver, or am I getting that the opposite?
Well, the liver and intestine are major sources that every cell can make
cholesterol. So when you're under stress of any sort, you'll increase your cholesterol production,
potentially increasing progesterone. So would it make sense that taking estrogen
therapy would elevate cholesterol or lower cholesterol?
They saw that for years with birth control pills. That was the only acknowledged
effect of estrogen.
That it was lower in cholesterol levels?
I know that it would increase them.
Oh, that it would increase them. Okay, so birth control would,
so you're saying that estrogen will elevate cholesterol levels?
Yeah, that's one of its potential effects.
Okay, so I'm so I actually knew someone that said she got off of her estrogen therapy,
and then her cholesterol elevated, and her explanation from her doctor was, well,
estrogen is protective to your heart, meaning, you know, they were saying so it has this effect,
and that's why her cholesterol elevated post getting off the estrogen therapy. So I don't
know if there was another mechanism going on there. But that was something that I have heard
anecdotally. Is there any explanation for that?
Hello.
Was that a question?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, there was a question. Would there ever be a reason
where estrogen therapy would have a cholesterol lowering effect?
I'm sure there are situations where that can happen.
Okay, okay. Not normally.
If you poison the liver adequately, it can't make for cholesterol.
Okay, that makes sense.
PUFA, PUFA, for example, very, very high level of PUFA will lower your ability to make cholesterol.
Yes. Yeah, well, and the same person had a lot of stress going on at this period of time too,
so that could have just been another variable that created the elevation cholesterol.
So can we just say a little bit about, obviously, there's lots of talk that being on estrogen
therapy can be protective against Alzheimer's. It can be helpful for the brain, which I always have
assumed that would be the opposite. Can you explain maybe why they're getting some of these
results that people on estrogen therapy have less chances of Alzheimer's?
All through the 1990s, the data came out clearly showing that women have two or three times the
incidence of Alzheimer's disease. Naturally, the doctor said, "Oh, that's because they're deficient
in the estrogen." But after the Women's Health Initiative showed that in this huge number of
people in the research, that their dementia and Alzheimer's disease were clearly elevated
when they took estrogen. So that very strongly suggests that a woman's history of the estrogen
exposure is why women have about three times as much risk of Alzheimer's disease.
And doesn't estrogen have an effect immediately on the brain? Because some people say, "I take my
estrogen there, my estrogen, and I can feel like that my brain is working better." So doesn't it
have a slight excitatory effect on the brain? It is excitatory. Katharina Dalton in the 1940s
and 50s was doing good studies on treating her patients for premature birth, toxemia,
and especially premenstrual syndrome by giving them progesterone. One of the main things she
saw was that in the progesterone deficiency, any time they were experiencing a progesterone deficiency,
their ability to pass a test in school was severely impaired.
There have been studies of why women speak faster, use more words per minute than men,
and estrogen will accelerate the verbalization of women.
The number of words per minute simply is faster in general in women. That's the excitatory effect.
But when you compare the information transmitted by fast talkers and slow talkers,
the information per word is much higher in the slow talkers. They allow the context and
more complex significance to accumulate as they formulate their sentences. But if you talk very
fast, you're talking mostly in cliches, not letting the information come through in an enriched form.
Essentially, what you're saying is estrogen on the brain is like cocaine on the brain.
Very similar in animal studies in the 1950s and '60s. For example, they would train an animal
so that every trial over a period of an hour, maybe, would get better and better
and finally reach 100% performance. If they would give a little extra estrogen to the animal,
it erased their learning. There was no gain from experience because the estrogen was
simply erasing memory. That's good to know that it's not sugar that we should equate to
cocaine. It is estrogen more likely that creating that excitatory manner, so another interesting
part. Cocaine increases all of the stress processes, blocking good nerve function
where glucose is one of the protective things against stress necessary for good relaxed brain
functioning. There we have it. One thing that I noticed in this book is I went through all the
references and the resources and the things that they said that is that a lot of the studies were
anywhere from four to 10 years when they talk about maybe some of these benefits or that they
found that taking estrogen therapy didn't increase some sorts of cancer. I know you've always said
that it can take a lot longer. If someone taking estrogen therapy for decades, could it take
a lot of time for them really to see the negative effects of their estrogen therapy?
It's pretty similar to the effects of radiation. If you look at a woman's peak estrogen production
around age 38, 20 years later, a little more than about 20 years, you see the age-specific rate of
breast cancer takes a sudden increase in the late 50s, 20 years later. If you look at the effect of an
early puberty and in the U.S., puberty is starting as early as age 7, the younger age of puberty is
decreasing the youngest age-specific breast cancer rate with now women in their 20s and 30s
have had a recent sharp rise in breast cancer risk and occurrence.
If you look 50 years later, 50 years for example, after that peak at the age of 38,
the absolute highest age-specific cancer mortality is around age 85 to 89. So it takes,
in that case, from 20 to 50 years for the estrogen to have full effect,
pretty much the same with the radiation.
Wow, interesting. I think it's just good when even looking at some of the research,
when we look at estrogen therapy, I feel like after the Women's Health Initiative,
because they did show at that point in time that HRT was creating a somewhat increase in breast
cancer in women. Obviously, that's where they stopped it, but since then, it seems that they've
been fighting that in a lot of researches. Even the professors at Stanford who were involved
in designing the WHI study, which cost hundreds of millions of dollars of the public money,
when the results came out, even though they had participated in designing the study,
it didn't suit their expectations. And so they rejected it, said there must be something wrong,
even though they approved of the study in advance. And the Stanford people were just
the most outrageous cases, but the whole medical profession was under the financing
of the estrogen industry. They were churning out, especially in the 80s and 90s, when the actual
science was putting the industry at risk by showing what estrogen is actually doing. The
industry got busy and placed phony articles in the most influential journals through the 80s and 90s.
And so everywhere you looked, there was an article saying that estrogen therapy prevented osteoporosis,
dementia, heart disease, another one, and extended longevity. But a 2004 paper published in
Archives of Internal Medicine showed that they said estrogen therapy improved the quality of life.
Women didn't like to have hot flashes, but unfortunately it shortened their longevity.
So there were studies looking at the actual facts that didn't suit the established view
of the medical profession. So the professors and doctors and journal editors all hated the outcome
of the Women's Health Initiative, but there was hundreds of times a bigger database for that study.
They preferred the publications with maybe 100 cases or 200 cases and so on.
Just before the Women's Health Initiative, since 1975, the National Cancer Institute
had been keeping data on almost half of the total United States population called the SEER study.
Surveillance, epidemiology, and the end result is what it stood for. But for example, their data
covered 350,000 cases of breast cancer. And then you have the one like the recent
Japanese study of 164 cases. And people like Bluming and Tavris go with the results
based on 164 cases in Japan rather than 350,000 cases in the US, which are strongly supported
even more so than the Women's Health Initiative. The design of the WHI
helped to make it look like there was less risk than the actual National Cancer Institute data.
So that's an interesting place to look. I haven't even heard of that in the SEER study.
Probably the biggest, most obvious disproof of people like the spoke you mentioned
is that in 2002, when the data from the study were published, there was a tremendous drop off
in use, filling prescriptions for estrogen, and even fewer doctors writing prescriptions.
And the sales by Wyeth of Premarin dropped so sharply in just one year. It was almost a billion
dollars of sales loss. And that continued over several years. And when they were using much less
estrogen, there was a historically huge decrease in mortality from breast cancer, starting almost
immediately. And the immediate results are going to be amplified 20, 30, 40 years later. But in the
first few years, it was already evident about a 10% decrease in breast cancer. And that amounts to
thousands of women not dying from breast cancer because they stopped taking their hormone
replacement. Yeah, I think that's definitely some data showing that it definitely had an effect.
One thing I wanted to kind of go back on real quick, because obviously a lot of women take
hormone replacement because they have horrible hot flashes. And it obviously works. They can
take it and their hot flashes. Can you explain maybe the mechanism of why estrogen helps to get
rid of hot flashes? The blood sugar and nitric oxide. Nitric oxide is what lowers your body
temperature during a hot flash by letting the heat come to the surface. And nitric oxide is
it happens that estrogen is a great activator of nitric oxide. But a falling blood glucose or
ability to use the glucose will increase your nitric oxide and cause a hot flash.
So things that interfere with glucose use are going to increase your hot flashes.
And you can clearly stop night sweats and hot flashes by just taking something
like a concentrated slurry of corn starch, some way of keeping your blood sugar up steadily
will stop the hot flashes. Progesterone is the normal way to turn off
nitric oxide. Keep your body temperature higher while estrogen causes you to lower your temperature.
The natural tendency of estrogen to increase nitrogen oxide
leads to the vasodilation and reducing body temperature. So people using estrogen
have a lower body temperature. People using progesterone have a higher body temperature.
When your progesterone fails, the vasodilation lets the blood circulate to the surface so you feel
flesh sweaty and hot as your temperature falls. So all of the mechanisms suggest that estrogen
imbalance relative to progesterone is what is causing the hot flashes.
The fact that you can stop a hot flash with estrogen is probably because
estrogen activates cortisol and other stress hormones that block the metabolism of estrogen
and that has the potential to inhibit nitric oxide synthesis. So nitric oxide will
increase estrogen though? Don't they kind of all work together so it's just that the overabundance
can inhibit it? Can you kind of go over that one more time? It tends to be a vicious circle,
but estrogen is one of the estrogen and stress and hypoglycemia will all activate nitric oxide
and progesterone inhibits it partly by keeping a steady sugar metabolism, maintaining body
temperature, but a lower body temperature creates a vicious circle including the production of more
estrogen. Right, but you would think that that would actually increase the hot flash, not decrease it?
Yeah, the known mechanisms of vasodilation are strongly in that direction, but you can override
those things by surges of stress hormones. Adrenaline shrinks your blood vessels, serotonin
shrinks the blood vessels as well as reducing heat production. So the stress hormones activated by
an overdose, gigantic overdose of estrogen turning on adrenaline cortisol and serotonin,
that can block the nitric oxide effects on the blood vessels. Okay, so essentially I think that
anybody is on estrogen therapy, I think it's probably important to check your body temperature
and pulse and see how your body is actually regulating to see if you're actually getting
a proper response from the hormones you're taking. Yeah, and looking at the research of the role of
carbohydrate, just taking a big bowl of oatmeal before bedtime, for example, will help to keep
your blood sugar up longer and prevent night sweats and hot flashes. Yeah, and I know you've always
said, and I have seen at work with women that some of the best mechanisms for really helping
with hot flashes without estrogen are regulating your blood sugar, utilizing a high carbohydrate
drink or food, and that can help. And also using progesterone is always both really, really
effective for helping with hot flashes. Is there anything else that you can think of that would
help with hot flashes? Yeah, watching your thyroid function closely without that your estrogen
progesterone balance goes wrong. Right, so then that would be also then supporting your detoxification
methods, because obviously as women get older, there's going to be an imbalance of the estrogen
progesterone and then just detoxify that excess estrogen. So yeah, and supporting the thyroid
function, there are things like getting enough calcium and vitamin D in your diet to keep your
metabolic rate up in the same direction as the thyroid function, which is just the perfect part
of just to kind of streamline into our next topic, which we are going to talk about dairy and milk
and calcium and how it's all very important to us. Because obviously, dairy is important to our bone
health, and it obviously plays a role in us preventing from osteoporosis. Can you kind of talk
about because obviously, people go back and forth with milk and dairy and you hear these studies
where hey, if they have more dairy, they actually have increases chances of osteoporosis. Can you
maybe explain why that could happen and the importance of milk in bone health? If you select
your data very well, look at certain countries, you can find populations that have that particular
correlation, but not if you look at everything else they're doing. The anti-milk cult has many
dimensions. Some of it is just outright neurotic fear, for example, that they think there's something
unnatural about breastfeeding in itself. To drink cow's milk is a claim that is against God's plan
and all sorts of things, but I think there's something Freudian and psychiatric behind
much of the anti-milk cult. When you look at animal experiments, milk and sugar
happen to be very clearly protected from bone strength as well as bone mineralization,
and bone strength is the important thing.
Right, so is there a preference? Because obviously, dairy is important.
Can someone just take calcium supplements and get the same effects?
For some reason, for various reasons, medical prescriptions have usually favored
calcium citrate, sometimes gluconate, but the gluconate tablet is somewhat less effective.
The citrate doesn't work simply. The extra citric acid in itself
disturbs your physiology. They think of it as neutral because orange juice, for example,
has lots of it, and they think of orange juice as necessarily being beneficial, but taking in
citric acid from the outside is very different from the citric acid produced in our own
metabolism and getting into the wrong compartments can even change our resistance to cancer.
So the closest to physiological would be calcium carbonate, but even that fails to be absorbed as
well because in milk you have the, especially lactose, but any sugar, glucose from ordinary
sugar works almost as well as lactose for stimulating calcium absorption. So if you're
going to try to get it from calcium carbonate, for example, you should make sure you're taking
it with adequate carbohydrate. So essentially if somebody isn't able to have milk or dairy for one
reason, one thing they can do is take calcium carbonate, which is also eggshell calcium that
you can make on your own, and having it with something like orange juice would help facilitate
a better absorption. Is that right? Yeah, except even when orange juice, the citric acid
isn't an official thing. The best orange juice has almost no citric acid, it's a sign of stress.
Yeah, consuming calcium carbonate with the orange juice with the sugar would help facilitate
increasing calcium carbonate. Yeah, the sugar is a really important thing.
Okay, so that would be a decent option for someone. What about, because there's a lot of
talk about what happens to the body under stress and that when we're under stress, we
take in too much calcium and we take in too much calcium, that calcium goes and goes to our tissue.
Is that what's happening? Can we take in too much calcium or where is the calcium coming that is
basically in someone's tissue? The parathyroid hormone, which takes calcium out of your bones,
does it by increasing fermentation, by producing lactic acid in the bone, and in the presence of
carbon dioxide and carbonic acid, calcium goes into your bone, but parathyroid hormone reverses
that process, decreasing CO2 and increasing lactic acid, getting the calcium out of your bone,
putting it in your bloodstream, and also shifting the balance generally of lactic acid, causing
the calcium to accumulate in soft tissues at the same time that it comes out of bones where it
belongs. And if you don't eat enough calcium and have adequate vitamin D, your parathyroid hormone
rises, and so you have less calcium in your bones, more in your soft tissues.
So people who don't consume enough calcium will get calcified arteries and calcified nerves
and other tissues. So you have to think about what happens when you get adequate
calcium and vitamin D, that you inhibit the parathyroid hormone and also inhibit the conversion
of 25-hydroxy vitamin D into  1,25-hydroxy vitamin D, which is called the active
vitamin D, but actually it's a stress-related factor that goes with all of the toxic effects of
excess calcium. Okay, so I'm going to go back a little bit here because I think we need to
chat a little bit about a few of these things. I think the first thing you said is if you consumed
vitamin D or you had adequate vitamin D but did not consume enough calcium, your parathyroid hormone
would elevate pulling the calcium from the bones and that would pull it into the tissue. Is that
correct? For the presence of D without calcium, I'm only saying that because obviously there's
people out there taking lots of vitamin D right now and maybe not consuming enough calcium. And
so with that person, they could be creating hypercalcemia or calcium in the tissue. Is that
correct? Yeah, the combination of vitamin D in the diet or from sunlight plus adequate calcium
and magnesium is necessary to keep a parathyroid hormone down and the active 1,25-hydroxy vitamin D
down. Okay, so I just want people to understand that because there's a lot of D controversy,
and I don't know if I want to really talk about in depth in this conversation, but taking D
without calcium and some of the other mechanisms like magnesium can create a atmosphere that isn't
very good for you, which it could create calcium getting into the tissue, which is what you do not
want, correct? Yeah, and taking 400 units of vitamin D daily, which a lot of doctors
claim is adequate, is essentially nothing. And so you see publications saying that
vitamin D is absolutely ineffective at preventing heart disease and hardening of the arteries and
so on. But that's because they prescribe only 400 units per day or to effectively raise the
circulating vitamin D to the point that it corrects things, takes usually around four or five thousand
units of vitamin D. Yeah, so is there any evidence, because obviously as people age,
they get calcifications of the tissue and the calcium is going in the wrong places. And
would that just happen from people ingesting too much calcium or is it more likely coming
from a stressed system, which isn't balanced, probably isn't getting enough calcium or isn't
able to absorb it and now the body is elevating the parathyroid hormone and now it's pulling it
from the bones? Yeah, anything that cuts your energy metabolism or that overstimulates cells,
they amount to the same thing. When you overstimulate a cell, it doesn't have adequate energy.
And the excitotoxic amino acids, for example, will overstimulate a cell, cause it to take up
calcium improperly, which can lead to calcification and cancerization. And blocking
adequate energy production also causes cells to take up calcium, keeping them in the excited,
de-energized state. Gotcha. And something you said a little bit ago, you were referencing
the importance of carbon dioxide in calcium metabolism. Can you kind of talk about that
again about why it's so important to have enough carbon dioxide? Because obviously we know that
carbon dioxide is produced highly in a glucose metabolism over any other type of macronutrient
metabolism. So how it is really important to be metabolizing sugars, because obviously that
produces the most carbon dioxide. And why is that important in calcium metabolism?
Most people have now at least heard of the so-called Randle cycle in which
oxidizing fat blocks the oxidation of glucose and vice versa. The oxidizing glucose
helps you not to oxidize fat, but to dispose of it in safer ways. And CO2, once it's produced
and keeping your fat oxidation low, the CO2 directly turns off lactic acid production
and has a directly quieting effect on cells. And as it's produced continuously in an active cell,
it and its carbonic anhydrase activated carbonic acid, as that streams continuously
out of the cell, it takes calcium with it. So metabolizing glucose
facilitates the anti-excitatory pro-energy function of the glucose oxidation
by this anti-excitatory effect of the carbon dioxide.
So what I'm hearing is it is the increased amount of lactic acid that could be greatly increasing
the chance of the calcium going into the tissue. Is that correct? Because I definitely see that
in diabetics and they start losing a lot of bone density. And they can't oxidize their glucose,
but what they can do is turn it into lactic acid. And even if it doesn't reach the point of
deadly lactic acidosis, it's always there tending to raise their free fatty acids.
And the raised blood level fatty acids is constantly interfering with the ability to
oxidize glucose. So the essence of diabetes is in the actions of lactate and free fatty acids.
They create a vicious circle.
Got it. Interesting. Okay. So I think that's an important factor to discuss because obviously
calcium metabolism needs carbon dioxide in a body that is using fat as fuel. Carbon dioxide
is going to greatly decrease. So for some of those people, they're not going to be metabolizing
calcium properly because of that state. Is that correct? Yeah, the circulating lactate should be
at the very minimum. Gotcha. Okay. So I'm just going to skip down to going back to milk because
again, milk is getting off on the calcium tangent, but I do want to talk about some of the myths
about milk and maybe we'll go over these. And one of those is the lactose intolerant. Everyone
thinks that there's obviously two thirds of the population of this world can't tolerate milk
because they're lactose intolerant. Is there a reason for that? Why can't they tolerate milk?
Is it the genetic or is it maybe because once it's just their culture and they stopped being
fed milk at a young age and now they can't tolerate it? There have been studies on the
Chinese who are among the so-called genetically lactose intolerant people. And in experiments,
they simply had them add starting with half a glass of milk with a meal which didn't cause any
disturbance. But if they keep that up for a few weeks, the presence of the lactose
gradually reinduces or restores the production of the lactase enzyme which every baby has
and which is turned off when they stop drinking milk. And so if you don't stop drinking milk,
you don't become lactose intolerant. But like the Chinese, if you chronically re-expose them
to lactose, they can develop the enzymes. Yeah, so I think that that's a myth that
can be debunked because there's definitely an argument in the anti-milk community that
milk isn't that great because so much of the world's population can't consume it,
but ultimately they could. They could bring it back into their diet very slowly and they
could start producing the enzyme because like all things in the human body, if we don't
drink milk, our body stops producing the enzyme essentially, correct? Isn't that what happens?
Right. About 30 or 40 years ago, the U.S. government was giving foreign aid, some of it
in the form of powdered milk, but the people who wanted them to buy waste from the fish industry,
powdered fish, for example, promoted the idea that giving powdered milk to family areas
was bad for the people. You should give them fish powder, but it was really a
mark of influence, a pressure on the government that helped to amplify the doctrine that
most of the world is lactose intolerant. Gotcha. So for people that later in life say,
"I used to be able to tolerate milk, but now I can't tolerate milk," what would be some factors
that may give somebody a lactose intolerance later in life? Well, often it's something else about the
milk. A lot of people just are determined to have raw organic milk, and there have been two big
dairies that I've tried to drink the organic milk from, and the milk tastes so bad. In one of the
cases, I looked on the map and there is a factory on I-5, I think it was called Wotang, that produced
a toxic metal for the government military, and the odor permeates miles around it.
This organic dairy was very close to the factory, downwind from it, and so the cows were
constantly breathing at the horrible sink and it showed up in the milk, even though
technically it was organic. The milk was making me sick. That happened with two or three
brands of organic milk, and I simply found that the most common reason was that they
allowed their cows to graze on weeds rather than known grass or clover, and many weeds are very
bad-tasting. Many of them are allergenic. Breastfeeding women often have the experience that
if they eat certain foods, the baby becomes constipated or develops related symptoms
because the allergens go right into the milk. So if the cow grazes on allergenic weeds,
the milk is allergenic. So good-tasting milk, whether it's organic or not, is a good bet
that it is less allergenic, and also highly pasteurized milk kills some of the bacteria
that people are sensitive to. So it's a matter of finding the milk that agrees with you,
and none of that has to do with lactose. Well, I'm going to touch on that, but
can stress be a factor in producing the lactose enzyme so that that would affect
someone? So what I certainly see is people under severe amount of stress don't tolerate milk.
Hypothyroidism and low progesterone interfere with the production of lactase enzyme.
Yeah. So could just improving thyroid function and getting out of stress improve
someone's ability to tolerate milk? Very often, that's all it takes.
Yeah, right. And then also then kind of going off what you just said, I think it's important to
understand that it's important to find what milk works for you. And for some people,
it is a raw milk, works best for them, and they feel great on that. And then for others,
it's ultra pasteurized, or it could be pasteurized for other reasons. And that's maybe why they
tolerate. So it's important to not just try one, that if you're trying to bring milk back into
your life to try a variety of different milks and to try to find one that works for you.
Getting on that, and I'm going to jump into another thought that people have is a casein
allergy. Is this a true allergy? Or what else could it be if somebody feels they have a casein
issue with dairy? With the what issue?
Casein, the other protein, besides the way, people say they have a casein allergy.
Yeah, some of the studies are based on chemical breakdown of casein. And then even chemically
hydrolyzing it, which is not the same as digesting it in your stomach and intestine. They test
the toxicity of the broken down casein. For example, by injecting it into a mouse brain,
absolutely nothing to do with the way milk is used under chest. So there's a lot of extreme
illogical propaganda attached to the idea that one kind of casein is better than another.
Right. But I think that some people will consume something like cheese and think,
because it doesn't have a lot of lactose, because everyone's either lactose or casein and go, well,
I don't do well on that. So I must have a casein issue or casein intolerance or casein allergy.
And I mean, could it be maybe something else in that cheese that would be the craziest issue?
About I guess it's been more than 10 years ago, there were several brands of American cheese
imitating traditional European brands. And I was eating a particular good kind,
I think it was from Vermont. And I noticed suddenly, it had an unfamiliar soft, moist texture.
And then after eating it for a few days, I started getting bowel inflammation symptoms.
And so I checked the labels, and they had suddenly changed from animal rennet to so-called
vegetable rennet, which means, in most cases, genetically engineered microbial enzyme producers,
which always carry allergens from the microbe. So I changed to another American cheese
that was traditional, and in a short time, the texture of that became softer, more slightly
different taste. And then I got sick. That happened with three American brands before I
investigated in detail and found out that by that time, two thirds of all cheese in the world
was no longer made with animal rennet, but with these genetically modified microorganisms producing
only usually one single enzyme rather than the natural complex of enzymes occurring in rennet.
So the industry of genetically engineered enzyme has almost completely taken over
world cheese production. So you have to very carefully read the labels and interpret labels
that they're using the language more and more slightly so that people will not dig too deeply
and find the genetic modified organisms in their food.
Are they allowed to put these, because I've seen them all the time,
it's a vegetable rennet, it seems to be prevalent in so much cheese, can they put that in a organic
cheese? In a what cheese? In an organic. So if it says organic cheese. Oh yeah, yeah, the
cheese makers have pretty much damaged the idea of what really is organic.
So that's allowed to put in a vegetable rennet that's been engineered.
Yeah, there is no rennet other than made by a cow's stomach or a calf's stomach.
Right, but some of these cheeses are putting in this vegetable rennet. So is that allowed?
That's a total dishonesty. There is no such thing as a vegetable rennet. It's like saying
butter made from cottonseed oil.
I see. So it's just their terminology, but it isn't really that.
Yeah, or soy milk.
Well, we have soy milk as in anything. It's just, you know, man, it removes the man from people.
Yeah, but to use the word milk in such a situation, one of the worst foods gets the name of one of the
best foods. Yes. Okay. So basically food manufacturers are using certain terminologies to make you think
you're getting something. I think they use that because everybody's so plant based right now,
they think they're getting something better when in fact, they're absolutely not getting something.
Okay, so what about people talk about the hormones in milk? They're like, I'm afraid of milk because
it has all this estrogen or progesterone in it or whatever. Is this affecting people's health?
Is it something to worry about? The amounts are barely measurable. They probably don't have any
effect. The progesterone will tend to concentrate in the butter. So it's much larger than the presence
of other hormones, but all of the animals hormones will show up in the milk and progesterone is a
major one, especially concentrated in the butter. And it's beneficial, but the quantity is very, very
low. And most of the hormones would be present in the fat too. I guess that's why it's more prevalent
in butter. So if somebody consumed a lower fat milk, the hormones would be greatly decreased,
correct? Yeah. Okay. So if someone has an issue, I've had people say that literally they've been
had cancer and so they won't drink milk. And I find that doesn't make a lot of sense,
but I think it's the premise that they think that the hormones are going to affect them.
Yeah, I think it's one of the tricks of the anti-milk cultures.
Yes, they are out in full force these days. What about people who drink milk and they say,
milk is giving me acne. What would you say is going on there? Milk does what? Gives them
acne. They start to get acne on their skin. Yeah, maybe they're drinking too much fat with it.
Any kind of fat in excess will disturb your skin energy production. And for any cell,
its functions decrease under the influence of fat rather than sugar.
So if someone thinks that they're drinking milk and they're getting acne,
then maybe consuming a lower fat milk would be to their benefit. I think so. Okay. Okay. And
what about milks linked to increasing insulin growth factor? So that's a conversation as well.
They think it is having an effect on this growth factor. What would you comment on that?
It has benefits as well as risks, but the idea that it becomes a danger of accelerated aging
and cancer and so on. I don't think there's valid evidence that those changes are harmful.
Okay. So you just see some studies that say that milk is going to increase the insulin
growth factor and that's going to have a negative effect on certain aspects of people's health.
And essentially you're just saying at this point, we don't have enough evidence that it's going to
do anything long-term. Yeah, you can like with vitamin E. There were lots of publications
over the years showing immense benefits from vitamin E. But then when the industry
had something else they wanted to sell, they decided to emphasize that vitamin E could be
a risk. And so they took the very papers that had been published showing changes,
implying that those changes were in the direction of benefit. But anytime they had a publication
that says vitamin E changes something, they said, see it introduced a change. That means vitamin E
is harmful. Everything you do causes almost an infinite number of changes. And you have to
evaluate whether the weight of the changes in one direction are more effective than weight in the
other direction. You can't argue anything from one or two factors. That's a propaganda tool
used all the way anything physiological or biochemical where you have a million influences.
They find two or three that could be harmful and say therefore you shouldn't do something because
it causes those changes. But they're ignoring the almost a million other events that could
be all beneficial. Well, that sounds like what they did with the estrogen therapy.
They found some things that they liked and then they focused on those and forgot all the other
things it was doing negatively. Exactly. That's why you have hundreds of thousands of estrogen
papers, almost all of them saying how wonderful estrogen is. So you have to read each one carefully
and consider the relatively few publications that show contrary effects, harmful effects.
And it always turns out that they've carefully selected things that could be beneficial from
estrogen, not things that are known to be beneficial. And I think this is just a good
understanding of why having a big picture look at the metabolism and how everything works and
looking at everything, not just singularly, maybe a single nutrient or a single hormone,
because if you just single focus, I tend to miss the big picture about how it all works together.
In fact, that's the essence of science beginning in the 20th century, such a narrow focus,
mechanistic determinism, whether it's in atomic physics or genetics and physiology. If you narrow
your attention, you can always become blind to the surrounding benefits to count only what you want.
Right. Or simply the nature of reductive thinking. Yeah, well, it seems to, you know, they use it in
a lot of different ways in today's world. When they just want to push an agenda, they can just
focus on one or two things and forget all the other things. It seems to be a popular way to
approach science or whatever that you want to call these days. Okay, we got a few more
questions about milk just to kind of round it up. And this is, I just probably said, what type of
milk is best? And I think you answered it by the one that works best for you. And how important
the quality of the animals are being treated and what they're eating. And that is a pretty
important part. So in your view, is it that important if the milk is raw or pasteurized
or ultra pasteurized, or even if it has additives in it, it's just basically finding which one works
for the individual, correct? Okay, so even if a milk has certain additives, because obviously in
most areas, there's nutrients added to milk that are low fat, but as long as someone can tolerate
those and seems to do okay, then that is okay. Yeah. Okay. Now what other sources,
if someone doesn't tolerate milk, where else can they get their calcium sources from?
As cooked greens have a very high ratio of calcium to phosphorus. And the ratio is of
major importance. Because too much phosphate turns on the parathyroid hormone, turns off
useful energy production, and so on. So the excitatory effect of inorganic phosphate
is a real danger. And that has rebalance by the calcium. So cooked greens are a very safe source,
if you can digest them. Okay. And can you just explain maybe some of the foods that are high
in phosphorus so people can understand why maybe some diets out there aren't beneficial because
they might be high in that nutrient? Yeah, the meat and fish, because they have a very low
calcium content, if the animal is healthy, their soft tissues exclude calcium. So the phosphate
in the ATP, for example, gives them a very high ratio of phosphate to calcium, nuts, grains,
legumes. In general, the reproductive tissues are, the phosphate is present.
So that the storage material can be turned into growth material.
So when something has a great potential for growth, that means it has to have stored
phosphate in excess. And that makes beans, nuts and grains, among the worst foods for calcium.
Okay, so essentially, a diet that's high in dairy, dairy or and or cooked greens, and then balancing
that with the meat, and maybe minimizing the grains and the beans and the nuts would be
advantageous. Yeah. What about just because I'm obsessed with this lately? Masa harina,
is that a decent source of calcium? Oh, yeah, because they add, they boil it in a calcium
hydroxide and let it sits for overnight. So it soaks up a lot of calcium. My dentist in Mexico says
in her area where people eat no bread, but lots of tortillas, even people in their 80s who
insist they want a tooth full. She says sometimes it takes her all afternoon to get a molar out
because their their jaws and teeth are so well constructed from a chronically good ratio of
calcium to phosphate. So the masa harina doesn't have a lot of phosphate in it.
Not compared to the calcium. Okay, so everybody gets some masa harina makes them your own tortillas.
It's very, very good for you. I can't think of anything else, Kitty. I don't know you've been
sitting there. Is there any other questions you'd like to ask Ray? I don't think so. I've just been
listening intently, learning so much. It's amazing. This is a really good episode and it was really
clear the sound this time. Yeah, well, Ray. Yeah, Ray, thank you. So I mean, this cleared up a lot.
I actually feel like it pulled a lot of things together and some deep understandings about the
estrogen therapy and also just about calcium and calcium metabolism and important aspects of
sugar and carbon dioxide in that. I think those are very key points that I certainly got from this.
Did you have anything else to share, Ray? Did I mention Steve Kirsch's website?
He's an MIT graduate who has been exposing science fraud, exposing the absolute disregard for
science from the great institutions like Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Absolutely not caring to discuss the scientific issues. His website, just on the issue of the
disappearance of science from our culture, it's very important for everyone to think about.
His last name is Felp, K-I-R-S-C-H. Yes, and he looks like he has a substack. I'm just googling
him right now. So yeah, you kind of touched on him and we were discussing the estrogen therapy
and how science has changed so much and what they're doing with these days and why we're just
getting all this, I guess, fake news because of how they're deciding on what is real and what is not.
So that's what Steve Kirsch, K-I-R-S-C-H, correct? Yeah, so he's worth looking into if anybody is
interested in going to that rabbit hole, but I'm good. Ray, do you want to just mention your
newsletter real quick? Oh yeah, it's now going to be quarterly rather than bimonthly and
overall the price is roughly the same and you can get information at raypeatsnewsletter@gmail.com.
Yes, I'll pop that in the show notes too. I'll pop that email. Yeah, and I highly, so does that
mean you're they're going to get the same number, Ray, or they're just going to get, are they
slowly going to get two years worth? Yeah, the subscription is still for 12 issues,
which means three years instead of two years because they'll be only four per year.
I have no idea how you keep up with all that, but God bless you.
I go when people's things, expire after three years. Amazing. It is amazing. Well, thank you
again, both Kitty and Ray. Thank you so much. Thanks so much, Ray. Thanks, Kate. And I know Kate's got
a, we'll have you on again, Ray. I know Kate's got a few other topics that she wants to dive
into. Okay, very good. Yep. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Peat. Always a pleasure. Bye. Bye.